compiler/README.md, before:

# Rae Compiler

C11 implementation of the Rae compiler (Phase 1: parse and pretty-print).

## Building

```bash
make build
```

## Testing

```bash
make test
```

## Usage

```bash
bin/rae lex <file>     # tokenize
bin/rae parse <file>   # parse + dump AST
bin/rae format <file>  # pretty-print canonical Rae (stdout by default)
bin/rae run <file>     # execute Rae source via the bytecode VM (hot reload path)
bin/rae build --emit-c --out out.c <file>  # transpile tiny Rae programs to C
```

Pass `--watch` to keep the VM alive and reload the file whenever it changes:

```bash
bin/rae run --watch examples/hello.rae
```

Watch mode now monitors every module pulled in via imports or auto-import folders. Try it on
the auto-import demo to see helper files reloaded without explicit imports:

```bash
bin/rae run --watch examples/auto_import_demo/main.rae
```

Early C backend support can turn simple `log`-centric programs into compilable C:

```bash
bin/rae build --emit-c --out build/demo.c examples/c_backend_demo.rae
```

Formatting options:

```bash
bin/rae format --write file.rae             # overwrite the input in place
bin/rae format --output tmp.pretty file.rae # write to a different file
```

Only one of `--write/-w` or `--output` may be supplied per invocation. If
neither flag is passed the formatter simply streams the canonical code to
stdout, which keeps shell pipelines simple.

See `../spec/rae.md` for language specification.

Commit message:

Expand C backend to handle parameters and arithmetic

compiler/README.md, after:

# Rae Compiler

C11 implementation of the Rae compiler (Phase 1: parse and pretty-print).

## Building

```bash
make build
```

## Testing

```bash
make test
```

## Usage

```bash
bin/rae lex <file>     # tokenize
bin/rae parse <file>   # parse + dump AST
bin/rae format <file>  # pretty-print canonical Rae (stdout by default)
bin/rae run <file>     # execute Rae source via the bytecode VM (hot reload path)
bin/rae build --emit-c --out out.c <file>  # transpile tiny Rae programs to C
```

Pass `--watch` to keep the VM alive and reload the file whenever it changes:

```bash
bin/rae run --watch examples/hello.rae
```

Watch mode now monitors every module pulled in via imports or auto-import folders. Try it on
the auto-import demo to see helper files reloaded without explicit imports:

```bash
bin/rae run --watch examples/auto_import_demo/main.rae
```

Early C backend support can turn simple `log`-centric, arithmetic-only programs into compilable C.
Right now every parameter is treated as an `int64_t`, returns are not yet supported, and `log` only
accepts string literals, but it is handy for tiny demos:

```bash
bin/rae build --emit-c --out build/demo.c examples/c_backend_demo.rae
```

Formatting options:

```bash
bin/rae format --write file.rae             # overwrite the input in place
bin/rae format --output tmp.pretty file.rae # write to a different file
```

Only one of `--write/-w` or `--output` may be supplied per invocation. If
neither flag is passed the formatter simply streams the canonical code to
stdout, which keeps shell pipelines simple.

See `../spec/rae.md` for language specification.
